---
date: 2026-07-09
title: chess, again
categories:
  - programming
---

# chess, again

If you've known about my interests in programming, you've known I've always been obsessed with
programming a chess engine from scratch. In 2023, I leared C++ just so I could give it a shot, and
I loved every second of optimizing every line of code to run as fast as I could. Of course I went
for the old fasioned approach of "crunch as many positions as you can" approach for finding the best
move.

Whether I knew it or not at the time, I am aware that for an engine stategy like that, speed is must
less important than smart features like better heuristics for pruning more branches of the search
tree. I was more interested in making things fast over making them smart.

I often fall into the pitfall of premature optimization, and while it's fun, I know now how damaging
it can really be. I think now my focus has shifted more towards writing clean code over hyper
optimized code. I spend too much time thinking about how my code looks, or how "professional" it is.
It's a major time waster but hey, I program for fun, and the end result is always worth it to me.

I think at about the time my paradigm shifted I decided to completely rewrite my original chess
engine. I changed the core design decision. My original attempt was completely object oriented and
full of encapsulation. I had just taken the class "Object Oriented Programming" in college. I took
me about a year to realize that I despised it. I has also started to get really into legacy C code.
I adopted procedural programming with structs and I found it greatly satisfying. I did feel like a
professional and I felt in control. With this new control along with some classy improvements like
bitboards I found some serious improvements. However I got busy with school and never really
finished the job. Although I still really love that code I wrote.

As I stepped back into the modern world, I started to get really into fancy tooling. Programming in
python forced me to adopt modern workflows and I got realy addicted. Also, as much as I loved my
second iteration I used CMake and, god, I HATED IT. It all felt ancient. And of course, my main gig
is python and so I tried to incorperate it into my chess project: building and training neural
networks that I could implement into my engine. But wrangling with ctypes also absolutely sucked. So
now that I have time to get back into this project, as much as I love the code that I wrote the
second time around, I just cant see myself getting back into it.

This brings me to today. As crazy as it sounds, I'm gonna rewite my engine from scratch for the
SECOND TIME. But there are several things that I am going to do different. First, I'm gonna stick to
what I am really interested in, machine learning. This'll heavily rely on deep neural networks to do
the heavy lifting. So although I do want a fast lower layer, I am not going to kill myself with
optimizations. Second, to satisfy my modern tastes, I am going to try out a fancy new modern
language with lots of buzz, Rust. It looks realy attractive to me. First of all, cargo looks
fantastic. And with things like PyO3 and maturin, I am GIDDY with the anticipation of baking this
directly into my favorite langauage, python. Second of all, the language's strict rules really
tickle my obsession with writing clean, professional code. And its speed with zero-cost abstractions
makes my incessecant premature optimization devil happy.

I've been obsessed with this [AlphaZero paper by Google](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.01815), and so
my goal is to recreate it myself. I just got a fancy new M5 macbook pro, and so I really want to see
how far I can take it by sticking to my hardware alone. I won't talk too much about it today, since
I want to document the project on this blog. I just wanted to describe my journey so far.