---
date: 2026-07-11
title: things about rust
categories:
  - programming
---

# things about rust

Known in the community as "The Book", I am reading the 
[*The Rust Programming Language*](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/), the official introductory
textbook for Rust, partly because I wanted to code my [chess engine](2026-07-09-chess.md) in the
language, and as silly as it sounds, I wanted to get back into reading books in general (yes, I
purchased the paper copy on Amazon).

I don't want to become a Rust cultist who's life mission is to
tell everybody that Rust is the only programming language you should use for anything more than
"Hello, World!". I'll be frank and say that for a student/hobbiest, the insane amount of rules
imposed by the Rust compiler is a little bit annoying. I want you to let me write *slightly* unsafe code
when I want to. But hey, that's what garbage collected languages are for. I'm writing this from the
perspective of somebody who doesn't write low-level code very often. For systems programming, I do
believe that this is the future.

Either way, I want a taste of what Rust is like. In this post I want to list some of the things
about Rust that I do really like, or at least find interesting. This post is not about the
things I don't like. Maybe I'll add that later on. Finally, I won't include too much about the
borrow checker, or else the list would be too long. I highly recommend you learn about it yourself.
Finally, this list is in progress. I will add to it as I continue through the book and onwards.

### Things I like (or find interesting) about the Rust programming language:
-   Immutability as a default! My code tells the reader exactly when a variable is expected to
    change, and when not!
-   Type inferencing: the way the compiler looks all over your code and decides what should be the type in
    every situation. Take a look at three ways to parse a string into a byte. In Rust, you use the
    `:::rust .parse()` method on a string to convert it into another type. It's a generic method, so
    it can output any type, so long as it has the `:::rust FromStr` trait. A byte, or `:::rust u8`
    has this trait, and we can convert a string to a byte with:
    ```rust
    let parsed = "42".parse::<u8>().unwrap(); 
    ```
    We pass the type `:::rust u8` directly into the function to tell it what to use. To clean up 
    that syntax, the compiler can look backwards in the code to infer what type it should use automatically.
    For example:
    ```rust
    let parsed: u8 = "42".parse().unwrap(); 
    ```
    This code works exactly the same. But what's really cool, the compiler can look *forwards* in
    your code too. Here's another snippet that works just the same:
    ```rust
    fn main() {
        let parsed = "42".parse().unwrap(); 
        print_byte(parsed); 
    }

    fn print_btye(byte: u8) {
        println!("My byte is {}!", byte);
    }
    ```
    The compiler looked ahead and saw that the value is used in a function that takes in a byte, and
    inferred that a byte is what we wanted to convert the string to!
-   Labeling loops, and being able to break out of or continue outer loops in a nested loop from the inner one.
    ```rust
    'outer_loop loop {
        ... // some code
        loop {
            ... // some code
            if condition {
                break 'outer_loop;
            }
        }
    }
    ```
-   Disallowing the existence of ANY other references to a value as long as a mutable reference
    already exists. This just makes sense!
-   The way that references to values have dynamic scopes. The scope of a reference starts when it
    is defined, like any variable. But thier scope ends exactly at the last line they are used! This
    is different from regular variables, which have scope which last until the end of the curly
    braces.